Good afternoon, everyone.
I'm here to talk to you
about the Cocoa text system.
I'm Doug Davidson.
So one of the most important
features of Cocoa is its powerful
and sophisticated text system.
The text system is very important
to Cocoa because it is involved in
just about everything in Cocoa that
puts text up on the screen.
Now, by now,
most of you have probably seen
our instant text editor demo,
and you probably all worked
with applications like TextEdit
and Mail and Project Builder.
So you should have some idea of the
sorts of features that the Cocoa text
system provides you by default.
But what may not be quite so
obvious is that the text system
is also designed to be highly
customizable in a variety of ways.
For example,
you might have taken a look at
a couple of new applications,
iChat and the new
Address Book application.
These are both Cocoa applications,
and they may be a little
bit more sophisticated than
the other applications.
But they are both very easy to use.
And they are very easy to use.
And they make use of the
Cocoa text system to do some
rather interesting things.
Now, I want to say,
we did not add anything to the text
system to support these applications.
What they did with the text system,
any of you could do with the
sort of things that I'm going
to be talking about today.
So I'm not going to be able to go
into great detail on any one area,
but what I want to do is at least
tell you where you can get started for
each different kind of modification.
What I'm going to do is first I'll talk
about some general principles and how the
text system operates and how it's used,
and I'll discuss how
you can customize it,
and I'll give some very
simple examples of this.
So, you probably know by now that
Cocoa fundamentally deals with strings
as sequences of Unicode characters.
But the fundamental object for
the text system is not the string,
but the attributed string.
That is,
sequence of characters with certain
attributes attached to a given character.
And these attributes can be any
of a wide variety of things.
They might be character level
attributes like fonts or colors.
They might be paragraph level attributes,
things like margins, indentation,
justification, and so forth,
and a variety of other things.
So the job of the text system is
to take an attributed string and
convert it into the sort of things
that you might see displayed up
on the screen when there's text.
Now,
These things that are displayed
on the screen are not characters,
but they may look like it.
They're glyphs.
A glyph is an individual,
displayable element in a particular font.
And the relationship between
characters and glyphs is not simple.
It's not necessarily one-to-one.
It may be that a single character
ends up being represented
by several different glyphs,
and it may be that several
different characters combine and
are represented by a single glyph.
What the text system does is to
take this attributed string and
convert it into a list of glyphs.
Then it takes these glyphs and it
positions them appropriately for display,
breaks them up into
lines and positions them.
And then it passes them on
down to Quartz to be rendered
and displayed on the screen.
So one other fundamental
concept is the container.
And a container represents a geometrical
region within which text is laid out,
for example,
such as a page or a column on a page.
So, for example,
we might have a character that
represents an A with an acute accent.
and it might have some attributes,
like a font, Helvetica 64,
and a color blue.
Now, depending on the font,
or possibly even on the
font implementation,
this might be represented
by a single A accent glyph,
or it might be represented by two glyphs,
an A glyph and an accent glyph.
The text system figures that out.
calculates these glyphs and then
positions them appropriately to
get the final displayed result,
which is, appropriately,
a blue accented A in the right font.
Now, in order to do this job,
the text system goes through a
number of separate processes.
In an attributed string, conceptually,
you could have any combination of
characters with any attributes.
But that doesn't necessarily mean
that every combination makes sense.
The job of attribute fixing is
to reform the text so that the
combination of characters and
attributes does make sense.
For example, we make sure that the font
attribute associated with a given
character is a font that can
actually display that character.
And we make sure that paragraph-level
attributes are actually constant
over the length of a given paragraph,
that is, from one hard-line break
character to the next.
[Transcript missing]
is Glyph Generation,
in which the text system takes the
characters and their attributes and
combines them to form a list of glyphs.
Then the next process is layout,
in which the glyphs are positioned
within their containers,
broken up into lines,
positioned within the lines.
And finally, we have display,
in which the list of glyphs is marched
up with their positions and sent
on down to Quartz to be rendered.
Now,
it's characteristic of the Cocoa text
system that these processes
are generally performed lazily,
automatically, on demand,
as they are needed when some particular
information is required that needs them.
So, for example,
the display mechanism follows
the standard Cocoa pattern,
where typically a view will have
"set needs display" called on it,
which will eventually, later on,
cause some display as needed.
But because all of these
processes are typically on demand,
what often happens is that
this is driven backwards.
That is, some view needs to be displayed,
but in order to display,
we need to have the layout information,
so layout happens.
But in order to do layout,
we need to have the glyphs,
so glyph generation must occur.
In order to do glyph generation,
we have to fix the attributes,
so attribute fixing occurs.
So the whole process gets
pulled from the display end.
Now, that's not always what happens.
It may happen often,
but also if the text system
finds some idle time,
it will, in some cases,
precompute some of these
things for performance.
So I've discussed some of
the fundamental concepts.
Now I want to talk about some of
the classes that implement these
things and perform these processes.
So this is a diagram of the four
major text system classes in the
order in which they contribute.
So NSTextStorage stores the text.
NSLayoutManager controls the
glyph generation and layout.
NSTextContainer models the
geometry of the containers.
And the NSTextView is the view that
actually sits in the display hierarchy
and handles user input and display.
And we'll be coming back to
this diagram again later on.
Why so many different classes?
Well, the text system is one of the more
complex examples in AppKit of the
model view controller paradigm.
That is, we have some classes
that represent the model,
in this case, the underlying text and its
attributes and the geometry of it.
And we have other classes
that handle the view portion,
that actually sit in the view
hierarchy that do display,
do user interaction.
And we have controller classes that
sit in the middle and intermediate
between them and manage things.
So I'm going to talk about
each of these in turn.
Now, I spoke of the text as
being an attributed string.
And in Foundation,
there are the classes NSAttributedString
and NSMutableAttributedString.
But the actual storage for the
text system is not one of these.
It is an AppKit class
called NSTextStorage.
And NSTextStorage is a subclass
of NSMutableAttributedString.
Keep that in mind.
Whenever you're dealing
with a text storage,
you can use all the
NSMutableAttributedString methods on it.
But it has something extra.
And the extra thing that NSTextStorage
does is that whenever it changes,
it notifies other components
of the text system that it has
And okay, there are other classes that
are model classes that model
the attributes of the text,
the obvious ones, NSFont, NSColor.
For paragraph-level attributes,
we have NSParagraphStyle,
which models things like line spacing,
justification, margins, and so forth.
And also,
it may contain multiple tab stops,
which--each of which is
modeled by the NSText tab.
And there's a special class
called NSTextAttachment,
which models an attached
file or an inline image.
And finally,
I'm going to consider the text
container as being a model class.
What an S-text container
does is it's pure geometry.
It simply models a geometrical region.
It might be a page or a column or
something more complicated within
which text is going to be laid out.
Now, instead of speaking of an instance
of the class NSTextStorage,
for short, I might say a text storage,
and so on for the other classes.
Next, we have the controller classes,
of which the most important--probably
the most important class in the
tech system is NSLayoutManager.
NSLayoutManager manages the processes
of glyph generation and layout.
It stores all the layout information.
It stores the glyphs themselves.
And NSLayoutManager,
interestingly enough,
is actually the class
that does the display,
that is, that marshals glyphs and sends
them to Quartz to be rendered
at the request of the view.
If you want to know anything about the
glyphs or anything about the layout,
you ask NSLayoutManager.
In addition, there is another class which
we usually do not deal with
directly that is controlled by
NSLAM Manager called NSTypeSetter.
NSTypeSetter is a class that
actually does the layout of
the glyphs into the containers.
Finally, we have the view classes,
of which the most
important is NSTextView.
One NSTextView handles the display
and user input for the text
displayed in a single container,
a single NSText container.
When you drag that object off
the palette in Interface Builder,
what you get is an NSTextView.
It's probably a class most
of you have dealt with.
One thing to mention about
NSTextView is that for historical
reasons it has a super class,
NSText.
And some of the NSTextView methods
are actually defined there.
But currently, the only subclass of
NSText is NSTextView.
So you can think of them
as being the same thing.
As I said,
one NSTextView handles the display and
input for a single NSTextContainer.
So if you have a situation
with multiple text containers,
say, multiple pages in a document
or multiple columns on a page,
then there would be one text
container for each of these and one
NSTextView for each of the containers.
And these associated TextViews
will know about each other,
will work together,
and will have some shared state.
For example,
the user's selected range in the text.
And there are other
classes at the view level.
The standard AppKit ruler
classes are used for text rulers.
And there is a special subclass in
NSL called NSTextAttachmentCell,
which does the drawing for
the NSText attachments,
that is,
for attached files or inline images.
So now,
how do these classes work together?
We're back at the diagram.
This is the most common situation.
That is, where you have a single instance
of each of the major classes:
one NSTextStorage, one NSLayoutManager,
one TextContainer, one TextView.
This is not the only possibility.
For example, a single text,
that is a single NS Text Storage,
might be presented to the
user in multiple ways.
And for that, each of these ways can have
its own layout manager,
representing a different
layout of the same text.
So a single NS Text Storage may have one,
or more than one, NS Layout Manager.
Now, likewise, as I mentioned before,
a single NSLayoutManager may be laying
out into a single text container,
a single page or a single long document.
Or there may be more than one
NSTextContainer representing,
for example, multiple pages.
So one NSLayoutManager may have one
or more than one NSTextContainer.
And these are in an ordered list
so that the text flows from the
first text container to the next
to the next as it is laid out.
But, as I mentioned before,
a text container has at most
one text view and vice versa.
Now,
usually the conceptual ownership flows
in the direction I'm talking about.
That is,
the text storage owns the layout,
owns the container, owns the view,
although there is another simplified
option that we'll talk about in a moment.
So this is what the diagram would
look like if you have multiple text
containers on a single layout manager.
That is, for example, in this case,
multiple pages.
And as you can see,
the text flows as it's laid out from
the first text container into the next.
This, on the other hand,
is what the diagram would look like
if you have multiple layout managers,
that is, multiple presentations,
on the same text.
So each layout manager would have its own
text container or set of text containers,
and they each present the same
text in possibly different ways.
So now we've discussed some of
the basic text system concepts,
and we've at least
touched on the classes.
So now I'm going to talk about
how you use the text system.
So first,
I want to touch briefly on the very
simplest uses of the text system,
those that don't involve you
touching an NS TextView directly.
Now, the very simplest APIs are
just categories on--defined
in the app kit on NSString and
NSAttributedString that simply say,
"Draw this string, and then you can use
it to create text." So,
this is a very simple system.
You just want to do some simple drawing.
You want to put this text here.
No fuss, no muss.
Just draw it.
Under the hood,
there are all of these text
system classes working for you,
but you don't have to
deal with them directly.
The next simplest situation is that
that might be used by a control,
let us say a button that
needs to draw its title,
for example.
And what it uses in that
situation is an NSL.
And the NSL knows how to draw itself.
The NSL does the drawing.
The NSL talks to the text system for you.
You don't have to deal with it,
although it is there under the hood.
So what happens if a control
doesn't need to just display itself,
but it also needs to do some input?
Say a text field is editing.
For that we--what we do is that each
window has a single shared text view
called the field editor for the window.
Only one control is going to be editing
in the window at any given time,
so the field editor can
be shared among controls.
And when a control starts editing,
the field editor is attached to it,
is put in there in the view hierarchy,
and while that control is editing,
the field editor takes over the
display and does all the input for it.
So input in the text system is
always handled by a text view.
There is one more usage of the text
system that doesn't involve a text
view that's somewhat more complicated,
and that is that in a
custom view of yours,
you can use a layout manager
with text containers without
text views to do measuring of
text or to do drawing for you.
And I'll mention that
briefly again later on.
So next I want to talk about the simplest
usages of the text system that do involve
you touching an NSTextView directly.
And
So the simplest and most common case is
that in which there is one text storage,
one layout manager, one text container,
one text view.
And that's what you get when
you drag that object off the
palette in Interface Builder.
And when you create a
text view in this way,
the text view automatically
creates all of the other elements
of the text system for you.
And in this situation,
you use a simplified ownership model
where the text view conceptually
owns all the other pieces so that,
if you like, you don't ever need to
talk to any other object.
You don't need to deal with
anything but the text view.
Now, even in this very simple situation,
there's actually a great deal
that you can do in the way of
customization of the text system.
You may think that I'm going to talk
here about subclassing in NSTextView,
but I'm not, not yet.
One rule of thumb in Cocoa is that
subclassing of the kit objects
should not be your first resort,
but rather one of your last.
Before you try subclassing,
first thing you should think of
is to do everything you can with
notification and/or delegation.
And in the case of NSTextView,
there is actually quite a bit
that can be done as the TextView
The TextViews delegate is notified of any
change that the user makes to the text,
and it gets to veto
or modify that change.
The TextView's delegate is notified
of any change that the user makes
to the selection of the text and
gets to veto or modify that change.
The TextView's delegate is also notified
when the user presses some special key,
like an arrow key.
And again, the delegate gets to veto
or modify that action.
So what this means is that the TextView's
delegate has almost complete control over
the user's interaction with the TextView.
I want to emphasize this point because
this is the number one question that
I get asked about the text system.
That is,
"I'm working with the TextView and
I want to do something
special when the user presses,
let us say, the return key.
What do I do?" And my
answer to this is always,
"Well, the first thing you should try is
acting as the TextView's delegate."
And now I have a very
simple demo of that.
We can move over to the demo screen.
So suppose you're writing a, say,
a chat program.
And, well,
while the user is typing in a message,
they can edit it freely,
but once they hit return,
that message is sent and
can't modify it anymore.
The simplest way you can do
that is as a TextViews delegate.
Now,
I've written a very simple demo of that.
When I was writing up these demos,
I decided I wanted to make
them as simple as possible,
so I limited myself to 25 lines
of code in any individual demo.
And I think these demos should be
available from ADC as download.
I'm just going to show it to you here.
So, for example, I can type along,
and then when I hit return,
The TextView's delegate is notified.
In this case,
it makes some changes to the text.
It turns it red.
In the text that I'm typing,
I can edit it.
Once I've hit return, though,
That text is selectable,
but I can't modify it because
the TextViews delegate is
forbidding that change.
All right.
Let's go back to the slides.
So,
next thing I want to talk about is some
more complicated text system usages,
where you go beyond the
single layout manager,
single text container,
single text view model.
So,
the simplest and most common case here
[Transcript missing]
The way this works is that
the layout manager has a list,
an ordered list, of its text containers.
And it lays the text in these containers.
The text flows from one to
the next as it's laid out.
You can add or remove
containers from this list,
and the text will automatically
be laid out into them.
As I said before,
you will have one text view.
If you want text views,
you'll have one text view per container.
If there are many text containers and
text views on a single layout manager,
they will know about each other
and they will share some state,
such as the user-selected region.
So again, here is a diagram where we
have multiple text containers
on a single layout manager.
The text flows from one to the next.
This is what you would use
if you had multiple pages or,
for example, multiple columns on a page.
Another possibility is that
you may wish to have multiple
presentations of the same text.
For example, if you're writing,
let us say,
a slide presentation application.
You might want to have one
presentation of the text in a list
of small fixed-sized text containers
representing the slides on one side.
And on the other side,
you might want to have a separate
presentation of the same text
in a single long text container
as a continuous outline.
So, what you would do in that case is
you would set up two different layout
managers on the same text storage.
: Then one layout manager would
get a single long text container.
The other layout manager
would get a series of small,
appropriately-sized text containers.
And that's all you need to do.
The text system will automatically
lay out the text in all these and
present it in both at the same time.
Now, what happens if the user
makes a change in one of these
presentations of the text?
All right.
Here's a sequence of what happens.
The user makes a change, say,
types in one of them,
in one of these text views.
The text view then makes that change
on the underlying text storage.
Now, remember I said that the special
thing about NSTextStorage
was that when it changes,
it makes some notifications.
It notifies its layout
managers that it has changed.
And these layout managers,
when they receive that notification,
what they do is they notice,
depending on the region that is changed,
which of the portions of glyph and
layout information that they maintain
are now made invalid by that change.
And they mark them as invalid.
They don't necessarily
recalculate them right away.
Then they tell the affected text views
that they're going to need display,
a set needs display.
Now, eventually at some later point,
some of those text
views may be displayed.
When that happens,
the text view will need display,
so it will ask the layout manager
for layout information to determine
what needs to be displayed.
So the layout manager has
already marked as invalid some
portions of its information,
so it knows it needs to be displayed.
And then it will ask the layout manager
to determine what needs to be displayed.
So the layout manager knows
it needs to be recalculated,
so they will be recalculated on demand.
The glyph generation and
layout will be performed.
And then the views will
be properly redisplayed.
So in this way,
the changes made in one text view in one
presentation propagate to all the others.
I emphasize this because if
you understand how this works,
you go a long way toward understanding
how the text system works
changes propagate down from
the views to the model,
and they propagate back up through the
controllers back to the views again.
And again,
here is a diagram for the situation in
which you have multiple layout managers,
multiple presentations of the same
text on the same text storage.
They present the same text
in possibly different ways.
Now, there are also a number of
options that you can set as to how
your text is going to be shown.
When you drag that object off
the palette and interface,
though, you may notice that it
scrolls in only one direction.
That is the--and the text
in it is arbitrarily long,
but it's not arbitrarily wide.
It's fixed width.
These are options that are set on
your TextView in your text container.
And you could set these things
independently in the horizontal
and vertical directions.
For this, I would like to point you
to an example on your CDs,
the text sizing example
in the app kit examples,
which has some very clear and
complete examples of many different
combinations of this sort of thing.
There are also some positioning options.
You can set an amount by which the text
container is inset within the text view.
And when you're laying out the
text in the text container,
you can set an amount of padding by which
text is inset within the text container.
There are also quite a few options
that can be set on the Textview itself.
And many of these are probably
familiar because they're represented
as checkboxes in Interface Builder.
Not all of them are, though.
For example,
on the Textview you can control
whether the Textview is selectable,
whether it's editable,
whether it shows plain and rich text,
whether attachments can be dragged in,
whether rules will be shown,
whether the font panel will be used,
whether as you type spell
checking is allowed,
whether it uses a so-called
smart cut-and-paste behavior.
You can control the attributes that will
be given to designate selected text.
It doesn't have to be a gray background.
And you can also control whether the
Textview acts like a field editor.
That means acts like a field editor
with respect to tab and return.
For a field editor, tab and return.
and editing rather than inserting
tab and return characters.
There are also some options,
not quite as obvious,
that can be set on the layout manager,
on the text view.
By setting options on the layout manager,
you can control, for example,
whether hyphenation is used.
You can control whether the layout
manager does that precalculation,
the background layout
I mentioned at idle time.
You can control whether inline
images and attachments are
scaled to fit the text container.
And you can control whether the
layout manager would use fonts with
screen metrics if they're available.
So at this point,
people usually want to know,
how do you put the pieces together
to get one of these things working?
So the usual process would be,
first you create this text storage
and populate it with your text.
Then you create a layout manager and
simply add it to the text storage.
Text storage can have any
number of layout managers.
Then you create however many
text containers you want,
size them appropriately,
add them to the Layout Manager.
If you want text views,
you create those and set
them for the text containers.
Set all the options, and you're done.
It's that simple.
The text system will automatically
lay out the text for you.
So, at this point,
I have a small demo of this.
So here is the sort of situation
that I was talking about before,
where we have on one side of the screen,
the text is laid out as a single
long text view as an outline.
And the other side, we have some smaller
fixed-size containers,
which might represent slides.
Again, a very simple demo.
All I do is create these objects,
add them to each other,
position them under 20 lines of code.
You can download this example from ADC.
Now, just to show you what happens when
you make changes in one of them.
As you can see,
they're automatically transferred from
one of these presentations to the other.
Let's go back to the slides.
So at this point,
I would like to talk about
what you can do when you deal
directly with the text storage,
with the model layer of the system.
Most people, when they start out working
with the text system,
start off working with nsTextView.
And nsTextView certainly does
have some methods that allow you
to alter the underlying text.
But at some point,
you'll probably want to go beyond that.
For complete control over the text,
you want to deal directly
with the underlying model,
the text storage.
Now, let me say again,
NSTextStorage is a subclass
of NSMutableAttributedString,
and all of the mutable attributed
string methods can be used on it.
The special thing about the text storage,
though, is that when it changes,
it notifies all its layout
managers that it changes.
There's one corollary to that,
and that is that if you're
making a lot of small changes,
you don't want the text contained to the
-- you don't want the layout managers
to be notified of each one individually,
and have to do work for every single one.
So for efficiency's sake,
if you're making a number
of changes in a row,
what you should do is wrap them
first in a call to begin editing,
and finally, when you're done,
with a call to end editing that
allows these notifications to be
coalesced into one at the end.
So what can you do with the text storage?
One very common thing you'll want to
go to is to be able to set attributes.
And the attributes that are available
that are recognized by the text system
are listed for you in the app kits
and as distributed string.h header.
: And let me just mention some of them.
You can set fonts.
You can set colors,
foreground and background colors.
You can set underlines,
subscripting and superscripting.
You can move the baseline up or down.
You can control the use of ligatures.
You can modify kerning.
And there are also
paragraph-level attributes,
things like
[Transcript missing]
As I say, the paragraph level attributes
are all part of NSParagraphStyle.
And they're all set by
setting NSParagraphStyle.
And this includes things like margins,
line spacing, justification,
the wrapping style, and tab stops.
Now one thing that is new for Jaguar
is that we now have complete support
for all different kinds of tabs,
that is left tab stops, right, center,
decimal tabs.
There are a couple of special
attributes that I want to mention.
One of them--okay,
when you have a document open in
TextEdit and you drag in a file,
what you get is usually either an icon,
or if the file's an image,
you might get inline representation
of the image in the text.
This is called an attachment.
It's represented in the text
storage as a special character,
the text attachment character,
with a special attribute,
the text attachment attribute.
And the value of that
attribute is a text attachment,
an NSTextAttachment.
This--what an NSTextAttachment usually
does is it points to a file wrapper.
And this file wrapper-- I'm not gonna
discuss in detail file wrappers here,
but the file wrapper models the contents
of the file or a link to the file.
How is that going to be
displayed by the text system?
If you just create one
with a file wrapper,
then the text system will
automatically create some appropriate
cell with an appropriate image,
typically according to what it
thinks is best to represent that,
usually either an icon or
an image representation,
if it's an image file.
But you can change that programmatically.
For example, if you have some alternate
image you want to use,
you can simply set that image as
the image for the attachment cell.
Or if you have some alternate
kind of cell you want to use,
you can set that cell
for the text attachment.
You can even create a custom
subclass of an attachment cell,
and we'll discuss that in a moment,
to do more or less arbitrary
drawing inside the text.
Another attribute is the link attribute,
which is typically used to
represent clickable hyperlinks.
And usually the value of
that link might be an NSURL.
The default behavior when clicking on
a section of text with this is to open
that link in the user's default browser,
usually.
But you can override that.
Again, as the TextView is delegate,
you can respond to that click and
do whatever behavior you want.
I mentioned attribute fixing earlier.
Attribute fixing is something that is
performed by the NS Text Storage lazily
on demand whenever something
asks for some of its attributes.
And it's at this point
that we make certain,
for example,
that by font fixing that the font
attribute for each character is a font
that can actually render that character.
And we also do something called paragraph
fixing and make sure that the paragraph
style attribute is actually constant
over the length of the entire paragraph,
that is, from one hard library
character to the next.
And another thing, among the things we do
is attachment fixing,
which makes sure that the
attachment attribute always goes
with the attachment character.
So one obvious question is,
how do I get text into
or out of a text storage?
The format that the app--that
Cocoa usually uses for storing
and transferring text is RTF,
or an extension RTFD for
text that has attachments.
This is the format that we'll
provide when putting styled
text on the pasteboard.
Of course,
we do provide plain text as well.
And there are methods that you can
use to easily read or write RTF,
RTFD to and from an NS Text storage
or any sub-range thereof.
There are also some methods
that you can use to read into
a text storage from a file.
And for these methods, what we can do,
if you choose,
is have the text system automatically
decide what format that file is in and
automatically import from that file.
Now, the formats we can import
from are obviously plain text,
RTF and RTFD, plus a few others.
We can import from the
simple text file format.
And we can import from HTML.
We do not write HTML out.
And this list can also be
extended with the third-party
additions called filter services.
What a filter service is,
is something that one of you might write,
install on the system,
and it would advertise what format
it understands and what format
from among the ones we natively
understand that it converts to.
As when this is installed on the system,
the text system will know about it.
And when a file of that type
is tempted to be opened,
your filter service can automatically
be invoked to do that conversion.
So any application using the text system
could then open files at that time.
At this point,
I should probably say a little
something about services in general.
Filtered services are one small
special case of the general
mechanism called services,
which are means of allowing
third-party editions that act on text.
Well,
they actually act on more than text,
but this is a text talk,
and so I'll talk about
how they apply to text.
In a typical case of a service,
what will happen is that you can select
some portion of text in any application,
invoke the service,
that text is placed on the pasteboard,
send over to your service-providing
application and process,
which then acts on it,
performs whatever custom
modification your service provides,
puts it back on the pasteboard,
sends it back to the
requesting application,
or it's pasted back in.
That's the standard kind of service.
There are also filter services,
as I have mentioned.
Filter services for text.
There are also--are filter
services available for images.
And there's one other
custom kind of service,
and that is a spell checking service.
So it is possible, as you know,
Cocoa applications can
make use of spell checking.
But it is possible for anyone to write
a third-party spell checker that can
be installed on the system and made
available to users as an option they
can select in the spelling panel.
Of course, Apple does ship a spell
checker with the system.
I should note that for Jaguar,
that our spell checker has
been entirely replaced.
We now have an entirely new spell
checker that is much improved
in its English version and that
also has support now for a number
of other languages as well.
One other way of storing things
in the text system is archiving.
Archiving is a mechanism, for example,
that Interface View Builder
uses to store its nibs.
I can't discuss archiving
in complete generality here,
but I do want to say some things
about it for those of you who
know what it is and what it does.
If you were at the
Cocoa What's New session,
you know that there have been some
significant changes to archiving.
We now have the new
keyed archiving system.
Now, it used to be pre-Jaguar that most
of the classes in the text system
would not archive themselves.
It was just one special case that was
used by Interface Builder for TextViews.
But now, with the new keyed archiving,
all the major classes in
the text system can archive.
So it is now possible to archive
more or less arbitrary configuration,
like the one I have on this demo app,
of multiple layout managers,
text containers, text storages,
TextViews, and so forth.
Now, when you archive a text storage,
well, when you store a text as RTF,
the attributes have to be converted
into the form of RTF_understands,
and only those attributes that are
convertible to RTF will be stored.
When you archive a text storage,
on the other hand,
all the attributes will be stored.
But one corollary to this, of course,
is that if you create
some custom attribute,
which you certainly can,
it might be a good idea to make sure
that the values used for that normal.
So we've discussed dealing
with the model layer,
the text storage.
Now I want to talk about sorts of
things you can do by dealing with
the controller level of the system,
that is,
with the layout manager primarily.
I said the layout manager controls the
processes of lift generation and layout.
The Layout Manager is the object
that stores the glyphs themselves.
It stores all the layout information
and performs glyph generation
and layout as needed on demand.
And as we saw in our example of
the multiple layout managers,
that when the text is changed,
the layout manager observes that change,
the text storage notifies it,
and the layout manager invalidates
any stored information it might have
that is made invalid by that change
for later recomputation on demand.
It is also possible for you to manually
invalidate some of that information if
you want to force it to be recalculated.
Now,
remember what I said at the beginning,
that the mapping between characters and
glyphs is not necessarily one to one.
So since it's the LayoutManager
that controls the glyph generation,
the LayoutManager is the one that
knows exactly how this mapping works.
So if you want to know which character,
which range of characters maps to which
range of glyphs in the glyph stream,
you ask the LayoutManager.
LayoutManager will tell you.
LayoutManager stores the glyphs.
And if you can ask it what the
glyphs are for any particular range,
Generally speaking,
the glyphs are just numerical
indexes into a font.
There are a couple of
special values that we use.
There's a control glyph that's used
for non-printed characters like
tabs and line breaks and so forth.
And there's a null glyph that the
layout manager will sometimes use for
padding for its own internal purposes.
The layout manager also stores
certain what are called glyph
attributes on the glyphs.
These are completely different
from the character attributes
we've been talking about along.
The glyph attributes are things
like the elastic attribute,
which appears usually on spaces to show
that they can be -- they might not need
to be laid out at the end of a line.
They can be expanded as
needed for justification.
There is also an inscription attribute,
for example.
This would be used on things like
an accent character to show that the
accent should be laid out above the
preceding glyph instead of following it.
When the Layout
Manager needs to do layout,
it contacts the typesetter,
instance of NSTypeSetter,
which actually does the layout.
So the typesetter
contacts the layout manager to
find out what the glyphs are.
Then it contacts the text container
to find out what the geometry,
what the geometric region
they are to be laid out in.
And then it's the typesetter that
breaks the glyphs up into lines and
positions the lines in the containers,
positions the glyphs in the lines.
And the typesetter is also allowed
to make insertions or changes in
the glyph stream as necessary.
For example, if hyphenation is in effect,
then the typesetter might need to
insert a hyphen glyph into the glyph
stream when a hyphenation is performed.
And then when the
typesetter has done this,
it calls back and notifies that
layout manager as to exactly
where each glyph ended up.
So it tells the layout manager
which container a glyph ended
up in and what line within that
container the glyph ended up in,
what position of the line
is and the size of the line,
and the location of each
individual glyph in that line.
And the layout manager
stores that information.
So usually you will not want to
contact the typesetter directly.
You ask the layout manager
for any of that information.
So, for example,
if you were writing your chat program
and you wanted to put some nice
fancy bubbles around your text,
you need to know where it was laid out.
You ask the layout manager.
The layout manager can tell
you many things about layout.
It can tell you where
each line is located,
what its size is positioned
within a text container.
It can tell you which glyphs ended
up in a particular text container.
It can tell you for any particular glyph
what text container it ended up in,
what line it ended up in,
and where in that line it went.
It can also do a number
of different conversions.
For example,
if you have a particular point and
you want to know what glyph lies at
that point or closest to that point,
the Layout Manager will tell you.
If you have some range of glyphs and
say these are the selected glyphs and
you want to know what rectangle should
be drawn to represent the selection,
the Layout Manager will tell you that.
And again, it is actually the layout
manager that does the drawing
at the request of the view.
That is, the layout manager marshals
the list of glyphs,
their positions, and sends them down
to courts to be drawn,
along with drawing other things
like backgrounds and underlines.
And
You do not have to actually
use an NSTextView to use this.
You can do this, for example,
in your own custom view class,
a couple of caveats.
You must have locked focus on some
appropriate view to do the drawing.
And one other thing to remember when
you do this is that the LayoutManager's
notion of position of glyphs is almost
always relative to the text container,
not necessarily coordinates
in any particular view.
It's coordinates in the text container.
Now, there is an example of this, again,
on your CDs.
This is the CircleView example
in the AppKit examples.
And that gives a very straightforward
example of how to draw glyphs
in a custom view by talking
to the lab manager directly.
Now, at this point,
I have another small demo.
So,
suppose you wanted to do something else,
something like,
something special for a rollover,
a rollover effect in your text view.
I decided to give a very
simple example of that.
If you want to know
If you know where the
mouse is in the text view,
then you can ask the
layout manager to find out,
for example, what glyph it's over,
what character that corresponds
to or what set of characters,
and other things like what line it's in.
And so, for example, as I roll over,
I've asked that,
and then I've highlighted
those characters,
those glyphs, in some specific colors.
Again, a very simple example,
under 25 lines, and you should be able
to download it from ADC.
On to the final and more
dangerous portions of the talk.
If you want to go beyond this,
you may wish to subclass one of
the objects in the text system.
So before you subclass one of
the objects in the text system,
first I'd like you to check to
see whether you can do what you
want to do without subclassing.
So there are quite a lot of options
and settings that you can use.
I've mentioned so far,
there are many that I haven't mentioned.
And you should take a
look at some of these.
They can do a lot of interesting
things for you without subclassing.
For example,
I mentioned something about selected
text attributes in the text view.
Usually the selection is
displayed as a gray rectangle.
That's by changing the background color.
But that's actually something
you can choose arbitrarily.
You could choose an
arbitrary set of attributes.
for representing the selected text.
Another thing is a mechanism
called temporary attributes.
And that was actually the mechanism
I used on this most recent demo
to change the background color.
Temporary attributes are
character-style attributes,
like primarily colors,
that can be set at the
layout manager level.
So they affect only some
specific layout manager.
They don't change the
underlying text storage.
They can be used for things
like temporary highlighting,
maybe syntax coloring or
something of that sort.
So you should take a look at many
of the options that can be set.
You should try using
notification and delegation.
As I mentioned,
it's a very powerful mechanism.
For example, the first demo I did,
you can intercept a wide variety
of user actions this way.
But if you do decide
that you need a subclass,
if what you want to do can't be done,
one of the things I've mentioned so far,
then you should try to
override the user actions.
The second thing is to use the minimal
set of methods to do what you want to do.
So let me talk about some of
the interesting things you might
want to subclass and what you can
You might want to
subclass the model level,
NSTextStorage.
You could subclass an NSTextStorage,
for example, to provide your own storage
mechanism for the text.
For example,
maybe your underlying model in your
app is not an attributed string,
but say, some character-- sequence of
characters with nested style
sheets or something of that sort.
You might have a custom text storage
subclass that converts from your
underlying representation to the
representation the app gets once,
text storage.
You might subclass NSTextStorage
if you want to intervene at
the attribute fixing level,
if you want to modify what
is done in attribute fixing,
if you want to add some
attribute fixing of your own.
Or perhaps you might want to modify it to
subclass NSTextStorage so it notifies not
just the layout managers but some other
objects of your own when it changes.
You can subclass in this text container.
I should say that all the objects
I'm mentioning here now have fairly
well-defined subclass interfaces,
and so they should be
reasonably easy to subclass.
The obvious reason to subclass
NSTextContainer is to provide
some custom geometry that's more
complicated than just a rectangle.
And you can get more or less arbitrary
geometry by subclassing NSTextContainer.
The way this works is that your
text container subclass will
be asked by the typesetter.
The typesetter will say,
"I want to lay out
some text in this line.
I propose this rectangle here."
And you get to modify it and say,
"No, no, you really want to use this
rectangle here." And if you have
holes in your text container,
you can say, "And by the way,
there's some more space following
the hole that you can use,
too."
Subclass NSTextView Subclass
NSTextView is what does the
drawing and the user interaction.
You can subclass NSTextView to alter,
in more or less arbitrary ways,
the way that the view
interacts with the user.
You might alter selection behavior,
you might alter drawing behavior,
you might alter click behavior,
you might alter auxiliary
things like context menus,
you might alter the behavior of
cut and paste or drag and drop,
any number of things.
Going a little further,
you might want to subclass
possibly NSLayoutManager.
Now, remember that NSLayoutManager is a
class that actually does the drawing.
So, you might want to subclass
NSLayoutManager if you want to provide,
let's say, some custom drawing
behavior at this level,
custom background drawing, or custom,
maybe you want to respond to some
custom attributes that you have set.
You might want to subclass to store
additional attributes that you may
have defined on that occur on the
glyphs rather than on the characters.
Or you might subclass to override
some of the other behavior
that a layout manager provides.
As I said,
the layout manager is what gets
interrogated to find out what glyph
lies under a particular point,
or it provides the rectangles
that represent selections.
So you might override NSLayoutManager
to override any of that behavior.
You might override NSTextAttachmentCell.
As I mentioned,
there are many ways that you
can alter the drawing that
represents a text attachment.
You can supply a custom image.
You can supply a custom cell.
You can use a custom subclass
in NSTextAttachmentCell.
And with this,
you can obtain more or less arbitrary
drawing within some region that you
get to pick in line in the text.
And not only that,
but it is also possible with such a
subclass to be able to handle user clicks
within that region in the text view.
[Transcript missing]
At this point, I have one final demo.
This is one I didn't write.
So here's a new address book application.
Let's see how some of all this comes
together in a real application.
So first of all, let's notice what sort
of things we have here.
We have, well,
there might be an image here,
a picture of the user,
if we had a picture.
And there's a custom text
container here that is cut
out with space for this image.
You notice some nice little rollover
effects as we move over various items.
You've seen how to do that.
Let's see if we go to edit it.
There are some changes
to selection behavior.
What else do we have?
Awesome.
Custom cell for drawing this.
Well, there are a number of
little tricks in here,
and I'll let you play
around with it yourselves.
You all have a copy of this,
and you can see how it works.
So where do you go from here?
I've mentioned a number of examples.
There are some others.
There are a number of
text-related examples on your CD.
There is also some documentation of this.
They -- in the
Cocoa documentation section,
you can find it on the website,
if you have one.
There are, of course, a number of books,
program topics, and other things
Of course, most of the sessions
have already occurred.
And you can contact Heather Hickman,
our technology manager.
And we also have a mailing list,
Cocoa Dev, and a feedback address for
sending feedback to us.